## Reading guide

"Bridging sustainability and digital practices" is written so that there is a common thread running through the chapters, so it can be read sequentially from start to finish. Also, the individual chapters can also be read independently of each other. 

In a teaching context, you can combine several different chapters, which together can form the basis of a course or training program. However you choose to work with the book, we hope that it will be an enriching, thought-provoking, engaging and perhaps even provocative experience.

The book is divided into three main parts and a practical appendix. The first part of the book consists of three chapters that together form a practical and theoretical foundation for sustainability work. This part introduces a number of key concepts in both information technology and sustainability.

- Chapter 1 is particularly focused on definitions - not only of the concept of sustainability, but also of concepts related to greening and digital transformation.

- Chapter 2 presents systems thinking and critical thinking as methods that can be applied both in working with information systems and in addressing environmental, societal and economic challenges.

- Chapter 3 takes stock of the current state of sustainability in information technology and serves as an introduction to the specific issues that come with the digital domain.

The second part of the book, chapters 4-7, looks ahead and outlines practical approaches on how to promote sustainability in digital projects.

- Chapter 4 takes digital design as a starting point and discusses how to enrich it with sustainability elements.

- Chapter 5 focuses on software development and provides practical examples of sustainability measures for digital systems.

- Chapter 6 discusses sustainability in hardware and networks and provides examples of how these can be made more sustainable.

- Chapter 7 explores the connection between well-being, well-being and digital technologies, and through examples discusses concepts such as digital well-being and socially sustainable UX.

The third and final part of the book discusses digital sustainability from some general angles.

- Chapter 8 describes "digital counter-growth" as an alternative to traditional growth thinking and reviews examples of it.
- Chapter 9 summarizes the book and hands over the baton to the reader with the goal of putting what you've learned into practice.

The appendix contains checklists and best practices that can be applied directly to digital development projects for software and hardware as well as networks. You can also access the appendix on the book's GitHub page: https://github.com/andracs/Sustainable-Digital. Here you will also find an overview of various online resources that support this book.
The book aims to inspire and motivate the reader to create digital practices that promote a sustainable future for us , becasue we all share living on the same planet and we all have the potential to make the future better for ourselves and each other with digital technologies. 

📖 Happy reading!
