# 9. Towards a greener, healthier and brighter digital future
"Old ideas got us here" - Poster seen on Nørrebrogade in Copenhagen
UN President António Gueterres opened the 2024 UN Summit of the Future with a serious but optimistic message: "First, the state of our world is unsustainable and we cannot continue like this. Second, the challenges we are solvable" (United Nations 2024). At the same summit, world leaders signed a Pact for the Future - which was (yet) another statement of intent for a more sustainable global future. For the first time, the agreement links digital with a sustainable future and the SDGs ( Global Digital Compact ). World leaders also see digital as an important element of a sustainable future. The quote from Gueterres encapsulates the message we have been trying to convey in the previous chapters: our current digital practices may be unsustainable, but the solutions exist - and now is the time to act to implement them.
The field where sustainability and digital technologies meet seems to be in a historically unprecedented dynamic and unpredictable phase. It's hard to imagine where our efforts to prevent the climate crisis - and its consequences - will be in five, 10 or 20 years, and it's equally hard to imagine technological development, its effects and how societal demands will shape it.
It's perhaps truer than ever that "old ideas got us here" and that we need to re-evaluate habits and practices. However, external changes and demands for us to change don't always land well.
We all have an automatic and instinctive bias in favor of the familiar. It seems unnatural to question current practices, to question what we have learned and to have to come up with new images to replace the familiar and safe ones we have from the education system and the media. Embarking on the near-impossible project of trying to get an overview of the many different professional discussions related to sustainability and digital development can feel like too big a project. But the challenges ahead require us to shift gears.
On a more mundane level, it means that you, me and we need to actively work in our fields for more sustainable practices. We can solve global challenges, and digital technologies can in some cases provide us with the information superpowers that can help create lasting change for the better.
We hope that with this book we can contribute to an optimistic-realistic approach that shows ways to navigate through the huge changes we are facing, but that also understands how to analyze and mitigate climate-related disaster scenarios.
It's easy to fall into the trap of thinking that with access to the internet and artificial intelligence, we can delegate reflection and various forms of knowledge work to machines and that we can do the same work and achieve the same results without having to expend as much energy ourselves.
We think it's different: The prerequisite for meeting big and new challenges requires that we use all the available energy we have as people and society, with the digital tools and methods we have and develop - but shaved of their negative and unsustainable effects.
Therefore, it is also important that you continue to build a strong knowledge base through experiences from practice and from the literature, and educate yourself on professional norms. But it's also important that you keep an eye on political initiatives such as legislation and democratic debates aimed at challenging bad habits, as well as what is expected of IT professionals so that they can help change them for the better.
We've covered a lot of ground in the book and it may have been overwhelming with all the angles that have been presented. The intention has been to pleasantly surprise the reader with the diversity of perspectives on sustainability and IT that exist. We have been surprised ourselves. We also hope that we have helped open your eyes to the wealth of methods, new theories and approaches that are bubbling at the intersection - even if we have only touched on a fraction of the exciting things that are happening.
The previous 200 pages are both an insight into the multifaceted development of the field, but also an expression of a methodological choice on our part: The fact that digitalization has woven itself into many different processes requires that our reflections and our work towards a more sustainable society do the same. The sustainable future places many new demands on the future IT employee. These include understanding and skills at the technical level, understanding connections at the collective/social level and an eye for interdependencies at the systemic level. We are convinced that the time is coming to an end when the quality of digital innovations and services is only considered according to narrow technical, functional or economic criteria.
In this book, we have conveyed many different definitions of, and approaches to, sustainability. Some have been more complicated than others. In conclusion, you could perhaps say that sustainability is "just" the description of what we can count on being there in the future. Hopefully, smarter, more curious and more self-aware digital practices can help ensure that everything we value and that IT supports will also be there in the future.
Thank you for reading along.

 
