{book: false, sample: false} 
# TODO

- Sustainability data /opdatere med europæiske low-tech alternativer 
- Esroom → Plus singularity
  
# 8. Digital degrowth
It is common for visions of the future of IT to be framed within a growth narrative, i.e. the idea of constantly increasing access to financial resources, materials for digital production and innovative ideas. Many scenarios for the future of IT are based on two very central notions (and figures of thought), both of which are based on an assumed increase in digital potential. Either in the form of expectations of increased computing power or in the form of expectations of increased innovation, understood as the number of new products, new services, new technologies that the competitive market of the future will produce. Both contribute to the perception that future computing power will be faster, more efficient and will surprise us with new solutions that we currently have only limited and poor ideas about. Both are based on a historically real development and a correspondingly valid experience that the development curve in IT has been moving steeply upwards for many decades.
In this chapter, we focus on different approaches to IT development that think alongside, outside or against that narrative, or that think IT development independently of those logics. We gather these approaches here under a counter-growth heading. Counter-growth (from the English "degrowth ") is the umbrella category for a number of sustainability initiatives in other domains, such as recycling , permaculture, upcycling, etc. In IT, these approaches share a focus on repairing existing equipment, on minimal use of energy and processing power and apply principles that are compatible with being an ethical consumer or producer.
The discussion of IT's own sustainability - i.e. its carbon footprint and resource consumption - has been overshadowed by notions of the sustainability benefits that IT is thought to be a precondition for, or a facilitator of. Digitization is often made an important component in notions of green growth (green growth is a term that refers to contributing to the green transition while securing new jobs, wealth and growth). This notion gained momentum during COVID-19, with 2020 seeing the largest global drop in CO2 emissions since World War II (Le Quéré et al. 2020). This has created optimism that digitalization - such as virtual workspaces that don't require traveling to meet - can help achieve sustainability goals. 
Green growth has gained considerable popularity among many politicians and in global institutions. For example, the OECD describes the following:
The increased digitalization of energy-intensive sectors holds the promise of increasing the energy efficiency and sustainability of many economic and social activities. At the same time, digital technologies can increase the energy and resource demands associated with the production and use of ICTs, offsetting some of the environmental gains they can bring. (OECD n.d.)
The EU also sees digitalization as an important tool to reduce our carbon footprint
Bringing digital into our lives helps us reduce our carbon footprint. We can participate in video conferences instead of traveling to meetings, monitor how much energy our homes use, and even increase the sustainability of agriculture. (European Commission 2024)
However, an introductory article on videnskab.dk on the subject conveys a critique of this approach:
By always focusing on "green" technological solutions that are not yet fully developed to reach the set climate goals, politicians can opt out of unpopular, expensive and potentially system-changing measures to solve the ecological crises, nationally and internationally. (Videnskab.dk 2024)
In this chapter, we will describe the different directions in IT and computer science that focus on the sustainability of IT itself. There are many terms for movements that have this focus - these are what we call lo-fi directions
But before we delve into the different approaches that don't rely on optimistic projections of developments observed in the past, let's take a look at two incredibly influential models that are often used to interpret IT development: Moore's Law and Gartner's Hype Cycle .
Moore's Law
[Figure inserted from file with all figures]
 
Figure 8.1 Illustration of "Moore's Law", the exponential development of processing power since the 1960s. Source: Encyclopædia Britannica 2024.

Moore's Law, shown in Figure 8.1 , stems from the observation that the number of transistors in microchips has doubled every 18 months since around 1965 (Hansen 2023). Moore's Law therefore states that computing power doubles every 1½ years. This leads many to assume that the current trend of ever-increasing production and consumption will continue. This assumption is perhaps not surprising as computers as we know them have only been around for 80 years, during a period of remarkable industrial and technological development. But humanity has already crossed some boundaries on a planetary level. Moore's Law has for decades fueled imaginative notions and speculation about what computers will look like in the future and what we can do with them - driving visions of "Smart Cities", "Smart Buildings" and "Smart Homes" - which rely on smart things (IoT ). While there are significant sustainability gains to be made in some of these solutions, they rely on notions of intense use of microchips on an exponentially larger scale than is currently the case - and often to support various forms of 'consumer convenience' rather than to solve problems to achieve the Paris goals. In addition, there are significant environmental issues associated with extracting materials (Crawford 2021), cooling data centers, and consuming clean energy that could replace black energy consumption in the transportation sector, for example.
Gartner's Hype Cycle
[Figure inserted from file with all figures]
 
Figure 8.2 Gartner Hype Cycle: Gartner has developed a theory about the typical evolution of expectations and disappointments with new technologies. Source: Gartner 2024.
Moore's Law looks at a development within a historical context and elevates it to a law that determines the future - it is an expression of technodeterminism, the idea that the future will almost certainly be far more digital than it is today. Another model that does the same, but in a different way, is Gartner's Hype Cycle (Gartner 2024), shown in Figure 8.2. interprets all technology in light of its position on a curve containing the following points: Innovation trigger - Peak of inflated expectations - Trough of disillusionment - Hill of enlightenment - Plateau of productivity. The message of the model is that technologies will always excite us until the hype dies down. Then there comes a time when we get smarter until the technology stabilizes at a productive level. In this sense, one could say that blockchain technology is currently in the trough of disillusionment, but that we are getting smarter and that blockchain will eventually become a productive technology. 
The problem is that the model doesn't account for all the technologies that died instantly (even if they contained interesting innovation), those that were rejected, or those that were adopted and loved by everyone from the beginning (the radiator for example). Gartner's Hype Cycle is thus also a deterministic model, and although it is widely used, it is not very useful when you want to take a sober look at technology development.
Perhaps it's time to start cultivating non-growth-related future scenarios and explore how to address technical challenges in computing research and practice that are not based on ideas of constant growth.
Eroom's law
Sometimes Eroom's Law ("Moore" spelled backwards) is brought up as an example of how technology investment does not necessarily create growth: as you can see in Figure 8.3, it shows that the number of medical patents has been decreasing since the 1950s, despite more and more investment funds (including for digital technology) being allocated to the field. So there is not necessarily a causal link between technology investment and increased output of innovative products. There are many good reasons for this: problems are solved, treatments become more effective and patients become healthier. Similarly, digitalization may have already "solved" a number of problems that further digitalization cannot make more efficient, no matter how great the processing power becomes.
[Figure inserted from file with all figures]

 
Figure 8.3: Illustration of the decline in innovation in the pharmaceutical industry, despite increasing investments. Source: Lowe 2012.

Low carbon and sustainable computing
A research group in Glasgow called "LOCOS" - short for "Low Carbon and Sustainable Computing" - is focusing on how to reduce computer-related CO2 emissions (University of Glasgow 2024). According to them, there is a risk that by 2040, computers alone will generate more than half of the emissions acceptable to keep global warming below 1.5°C. This growth from computers is of course unsustainable. That's why we need frugal computing, an approach that aims to achieve the same results with less energy.
Emissions from computer production exceed the emissions from operating them, so even if devices become more energy efficient, producing more of them will exacerbate the emissions problem. Therefore, the argument goes, the lifetime of computers must be extended. The research team presents visions for low-carbon and sustainable computing that are simple but ambitious:
●	Extending the lifetime of devices and increasing their capacity - without increasing energy consumption and solely through advances in computer science, i.e. better algorithms, better software design, better programming languages and compilers etc.
●	In the meantime: Developing the science and technology for the next generation of devices designed for energy efficiency and longevity through pervasive hardware-software co-design.
●	Extending each subsequent cycle to develop computing resources that last virtually forever and use very little energy. (Vanderbauwhede 2023)
For that vision to be realized, various barriers must be overcome:
●	Software must be designed to support long-life devices .
●	Software engineering strategies are needed to deal with extended software lifecycles and especially technical debt.
●	Longer lifespan means more opportunities to exploit vulnerabilities, creating a need for better cybersecurity.
●	New approaches need to be developed to reduce the overall energy consumption of the entire system.
Computing within Limits
One group that shares the Glasgow group's vision is "Computing within Limits"
Important literature for the LIMITS group is Eli Blevis' "Sustainable Interaction Design" (Blevis 2007), which focuses on the material consequences of interaction design. Other early articles that sparked interest among LIMITS researchers were Jeff Wong's "Prepare for Descent: Interaction Design in Our New Future" (Wong 2009) and Silberman and Tomlinson's "Precarious Infrastructure and Postapocalyptic Computing" (Silberman & Tomlinson 2010). These articles drew attention to the challenges of sustainability and the lack of focus on physical, material and energy limits in interaction design. The LIMITS group emphasizes the activation of long-term returns and seeks to align its efforts with the science documenting global climate-related change. LIMITS seeks to explore ways in which digitalization can support long-term well-being (Nardi et al. 2018). 

Permacomputing
Permacomputing asks the question: "Is there room for computing and networking technology where humans contribute to the well-being of the biosphere , instead of its destruction? If so, how?" (Permacomputing 2024).
As the name suggests, the group is inspired by permaculture (perma: renewable), a set of principles of agriculture that defines itself in opposition to industrial agriculture. Permaculture focuses on regenerative agriculture, rewilding, social resilience and a holistic systemic approach. It is not clear if the answer to the above question is a resounding yes, but it appears that the path there is through radical reduction of wastefulness and a change in attitudes. Permacomputing has no desire to return to the past, but to explore the aesthetics and culture that could make digitalization a transformative force.
Permacomputing tries to translate principles from agriculture to computers, and this results in the following advice:
●	Take care of life.
●	Watch out for the chips.
●	Keep it small.
●	Hope for the best, prepare for the worst.
●	Keep it flexible.
●	Build on solid ground.
●	Amplify awareness.
●	Expose everything.
●	React to change.
●	Everything has a place.
The following characterize systems built according to permacomputing principles. They are:
●	Accessible: well documented and adaptable to individual needs.
●	Compatible: works on a variety of architectures.
●	Efficient: uses as few resources (power, memory, etc.) as possible.
●	Flexible: modular, portable and adaptable to different use cases.
●	Resilient: repairable, descent-friendly, offline-first, low maintenance, designed for disassembly and planned for longevity .

Whether digital technology can play a role in the society of the future is for the people behind Permacomputing both a practical and a utopian question. The practical focus is about thinking wisely with materials, power consumption, etc. The utopian part of the project is about exploring whether it is possible to apply principles of digitalization that require fundamentally new perspectives, methods and ideas.
"Freewheeling apps" is a project developed in the spirit of permacomputing and is described as a sustainable platform for the future of software. They are small programs that are: "Easy to download. Easy to run. Easy to modify. Easy to share" (Freewheeling Apps n.d.). They are also apps that are free, open source and rarely need updating. The programs do not require an installation process but can be run directly and their source code is transparent - you can always peek into the running app. The programs available for download are small word processing and image editing programs.
A solar-powered website
Another example of a low-tech and minimalistic approach is described in Roel Roscam Abbing's article "This is a solar-powered website, which means it sometimes goes offline" (Abbing 2021). In the article, he describes how counter-growth principles can be used as a design guide for ICT systems with limited energy resources. Abbing is the founder and editor of Lowtech Magazine, which explores the intersection of new and old technologies, and he believes that "interesting opportunities arise when we combine old technology with new knowledge and materials, or when we apply old concepts and traditional knowledge to modern technology" (Decker 2024).
In the article, Abbing walks through the process of building a solar-powered website (and the challenges associated with spreading the kind of sustainability that the site exemplifies), an innovation project that uses energy scarcity as a creative challenge - and which Abbing describes as a "design provocation". The website (which is also the Lowtech Magazine site) was developed in 2018 and is online at the time of writing (November 2024). It has approximately one million unique visits per year and is built on available web server technologies. Knowledge about the techniques needed to build the solution was found on the open internet (e.g. blogs and websites). The research phase aimed to find a "holistic strategy to radically reduce website energy consumption through a combination of graphical, technical and conceptual approaches" ( XX ).
The resulting design is a static website (where the conditions under which the website is developed are a central part of the communication) hosted on low-power hardware with a low-power chipset originally developed for smartphones. It consumes a maximum of 2.5 Wh. The system is powered by an off-grid solar system in Barcelona and the solar array consists of a 30W solar panel and a 168 Wh lead-acid battery. At maximum power consumption, the battery is discharged after three days. If it's been cloudy for a week, the system shuts down until the sun returns.
The website content itself has been made as lightweight as possible. Images are only loaded when they are actively downloaded, are duotone (in two colors) and rasterized - meaning pixels are removed from them.
But what is Abbing's overall conclusion of the project?
●	Building this kind of website requires expert technical knowledge.
●	It scales poorly - the more users, the more energy it uses, the more often it will be unavailable.
●	The website does not use a database, which makes interaction with users difficult.
But: It opens up new ideas on how to create technical systems that are designed to be inaccessible when certain energy thresholds are exceeded.
Convivial computing
Convivial computing is inspired by philosopher and educational thinker Ivan Illich (1926-2002).
In a 1975 article, "Tools for Conviviality", he calls for people to limit themselves in their technology development. That is, they focus on making technology less sophisticated so that not just a few experts can operate, develop and repair it - in other words, make the operating principles of technology understandable and simple for the user. When repairing technology requires expert knowledge, it necessarily leads to a social imbalance in who has power and who is dependent on others. This requires a willingness to rethink programming and make programming activities more inclusive and collaborative - for example, by involving people with different technical backgrounds (Kato & Shimakage 2020). In the article, he calls for making programming activities more social and collaborative by involving people from different technical backgrounds. 
In other words, it is an approach to digitalization that will give control back to citizens and consumers instead of storing algorithmic processes in black boxes that only a minority have insight into and can control. Digital technologies becoming "convivial" (which might best be translated as "welcoming") enables repair and increases the sense of autonomy and authority - as opposed to the powerlessness and disconnection citizens can experience when they come into contact with large, bureaucratic and centralized IT systems. Thus, there is both a green and a socially sustainable aspect to convivial computing.
Junkyard computing
The concept of junkyard computing (Switzer et al. 2023) relates to a number of other recycling approaches ("junkyard" means "junkyard"). An article from 2023 sheds light on the resource of unused smartphones lying in drawers:
1.5 billion smartphones are sold every year and most are taken out of use less than two years later. The majority of these unwanted smartphones are neither discarded nor recycled, but are lying around in drawers and storage units. This computational stockpile represents significant wasted potential: Modern smartphones have increasingly efficient and energy-efficient processors, extensive networking capabilities and reliable built-in power supplies (Switzer et al. 2023: 400).
At San Diego State University, the Kastner Research Group is working on junkyard computing in a project that aims to recycle unwanted smartphones (Kastner Research Group2023). The data warehouse of unused smartphones represents enormous potential. The group's research focus is to find out how to transform a user-optimized, interactive device into a reliable device capable of long-term, unattended operation, for example in the form of web servers, wildlife monitoring sensors or small mobile data centers. The group is developing methods to measure production and operational costs, linking these to economic models and creating a roadmap with old electronic devices. The project tests the ideas on a large scale to empirically establish how to use phones as computers and phones as sensors.
Summary: What can you take away from this chapter?
We've shared a number of examples of sustainable digitalization that tend to fly under the radar in the big, broad public debates about the role of technology in the green transition. Critics will say that the aforementioned directions and groups represent a naive approach, as major climate challenges must be solved with major technology solutions, and repairing and extending old hardware doesn't count in that picture. The answer to this criticism could be that there is a need to find solutions to digitalization's problem of waste, redundancy and e-waste and the tendency for IT to grow so big that the industry itself loses control over it. In addition, it is clear that much of the criticism that has come from this low-tech sphere actually tends to be taken up by the big global players and become the starting point for improvements in usability and accessibility. 
Another reason why we have taken the time to describe the directions is that they provide an excellent introduction to basic computational principles for students. There are a lot of interesting hands-on exercises in developing lo-fi solutions using existing hardware and legacy programming languages. These kinds of exercises are also great for developing an analytical eye for how complicated and opaque IT systems have become - and for starting discussions about alternatives.
